David Deutsch discovered the poppers
criterion of demarcation of
falsification was just a special case of
a broader phenomenon in epistemology may
have observed a claim that is
falsifiable does not mean the claim of
scientific for example if I claim the
world will end June 6 2026
I've got a falsifiable claim but it's
scientific if I say cobra venom cures
heart disease
I've got a testable claim but is that
scientific clearly this is not enough to
make a claim scientific but science must
deal in evidence we must be able to at
least tented things if a thing purports
to be science it isn't it is necessary
it is falsifiable but it's just not
sufficient popper made a huge leap in
discovering falsification and Doge took
the next step
good explanations are hard to vary now
you can Google his TED talk called
a new way to explain an explanation for
for this but it was first hinted at in
the fabric of reality if your favorite
beautiful theory is slain by an ugly
fact then if the theory is any good you
shouldn't be able to just change it a
little bit in order to now explain what
went wrong Deutsch in the fabric of
reality uses the following example if
you think eating a kilogram of grass
cures the common cold and someone tries
and it doesn't work so your theory is
falsified then if you come back with Oh
actually it's more like 1.1 kilograms
try again
this is called an ad hoc modification
making your theory easy to vary and so
we can reject the grass cures the cold
theory and all infinite variants of it
on that basis we don't have to keep
testing it and it's fair for us to say
we know that grass doesn't cure the
common cold does this mean we're sure it
doesn't that was certain one day someone
might come along and show how if you
isolate some chemical in the grass and
add it to some other chemical in alcohol
and take that as a pill that it won't
cure cold viruses or no we can never be
sure but we've no reason to think this
is or ever will be the case
in science what we need are explanations
true treatments for disease usually come
with scientific explanations mechanisms
about cause and effect they use words
invoking viruses or bacteria and how
they are deactivated or destroyed by
chemicals the grass theory doesn't do
that if I say penicillin kills the
meningococcal virus or meningococcal
bacteria rather by causing cell walls to
burst
so that bacteria is killed it becomes
hard to vary in its details you can look
under a microscope and test this theory
you can see that it is indeed penicillin
the chemical and not some other that is
involved you can replace the chemical
with something else and you'll find the
cure doesn't work anymore and doctors
will prescribe just the right amount of
penicillin in order to kill
meningococcal bacteria in very narrow
ranges too little and it won't work too
much and it might be as dangerous as the
disease itself so scientific theories
are hard too very explanations of the
physical world and just one feature they
have which is hard to vary is that they
are falsifiable and when they survive a
crucial test comparing them to a rival
theory when they survive that experiment
that other rivals do not
that's an exceedingly hard to vary
feature of their explanatory content